Spatial
=======

This gallery focuses on **spatial plotting and mapped interpretation** in
GeoPrior.

The pages in this section are built as **guided lessons** for users who
already have coordinates, mapped variables, forecast surfaces, or
spatially referenced evaluation outputs and now want to answer a
practical question:

**What is happening across space, where are the important local
patterns, and which spatial view best supports the decision I need to
make?**

That is the central purpose of this gallery.

Unlike the forecasting gallery, which focuses on trajectories,
forecast-step tables, and direct forecast displays, and unlike the
evaluation gallery, which focuses on score-based judgment, the pages in
this section are organized around a different object:

**the spatial pattern itself**.

These lessons teach users how to read mapped views such as:

- raw point-based spatial scatter maps,
- region-of-interest zoom views,
- interpolated contour surfaces,
- hotspot-focused maps,
- Voronoi influence partitions,
- and gridded or smoothed heatmaps.

In other words, this gallery is about **reasoning from spatial
structure**. It helps users decide whether a pattern is broad or local,
well supported or sparsely sampled, smooth or abrupt, concentrated in a
few hotspots or spread across the full domain, and whether a zoomed,
partitioned, or smoothed view is the most honest way to present it.

Why this gallery exists
-----------------------

Spatial data almost always supports more than one visual story.

The same values can be shown as:

- individual observed points,
- a zoomed subset of a critical subregion,
- a smoothed continuous-looking field,
- an interpolated contour surface,
- a hotspot-only emphasis,
- or a nearest-observation partition of influence.

Each of those views is useful, but each answers a different question and
carries a different risk of misinterpretation.

For example:

- a scatter map is often the most honest first view because it preserves
  the sampled points,
- a contour or heatmap can make broad spatial structure easier to see,
  but may visually imply smoothness the data do not truly support,
- a hotspot map is excellent for identifying operational priority zones,
  but intentionally hides the rest of the field,
- and a Voronoi map is useful when users need to understand local support
  and nearest-point influence rather than interpolation.

This gallery therefore turns spatial visualization into a sequence of
lessons. Each page shows how to:

#. build a small, stable spatial example,
#. call one spatial plotting helper,
#. explain what the map is actually emphasizing,
#. show what the view is good at and what it can hide,
#. and finish with a practical rule for using the same logic on real
   forecast or geospatial tables.

The goal is not only to draw maps. The goal is to teach users how to
**reason from the map they choose**.

What this gallery teaches
-------------------------

Most lessons in this section follow the same broad structure:

#. introduce the spatial question the plot helps answer,
#. prepare a stable table with coordinates, one or more value columns,
   and optionally time slices,
#. call the helper in its simplest useful mode,
#. explain how to read the spatial pattern before interpreting it,
#. add one or two alternative usage patterns,
#. finish with a checklist for adapting the helper to real coordinate
   tables.

That structure matters. It means the examples are not only API demos.
They are meant to function as **spatial reading lessons** for users who
want to understand their own mapped outputs later.

What this gallery is not
------------------------

This section does **not** aim to:

- replace GIS software for advanced cartographic workflows,
- replace the evaluation gallery for metric-based judgment,
- replace the forecasting gallery for direct temporal forecast reading,
- or imply that interpolation always makes a spatial result more
  trustworthy.

Instead, it focuses on one practical job:

**teach the user which spatial view to choose, what it emphasizes, and
what kind of spatial conclusion it can support safely.**

A useful rule of thumb is:

- ``forecasting/`` explains what the forecasts look like over steps or
  samples,
- ``evaluation/`` explains how good those forecasts are,
- ``spatial/`` explains where the important mapped patterns are and how
  to display them honestly,
- ``diagnostics/`` explains workflow validity and fit-oriented checks,
- ``inspection/`` explains how to read the saved artifacts generated by
  those workflows.

Module guide
------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 36 22 42

   * - Module
     - Main output
     - Purpose
   * - ``plot_spatial_overview.py``
     - Spatial scatter lesson
     - Learn the default full-domain point map, the role of time slices,
       shared versus per-panel colorbars, and why a raw point view is
       often the best first spatial inspection.
   * - ``plot_spatial_roi_overview.py``
     - ROI zoom lesson
     - Focus on a bounded subregion across time and compare several
       mapped variables inside the same local window.
   * - ``plot_spatial_contours_overview.py``
     - Contour-surface lesson
     - Interpolate point values into contour bands, understand how
       smoothing and contour levels shape interpretation, and learn when
       contour maps are helpful versus overly suggestive.
   * - ``plot_hotspots_overview.py``
     - Hotspot lesson
     - Highlight extreme-value zones using percentile or fixed
       thresholds and use hotspot overlays for priority-oriented spatial
       decisions.
   * - ``plot_spatial_voronoi_overview.py``
     - Voronoi lesson
     - Read nearest-observation influence regions and learn when a
       partition view is more honest than interpolation.
   * - ``plot_spatial_heatmap_overview.py``
     - Heatmap lesson
     - Build gridded or smoothed field views and decide when a heatmap
       clarifies the overall field versus when it hides sparse support.

Suggested reading paths
-----------------------

There is no single correct order, but three reading paths are especially
useful.

First-look spatial reading path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Choose this path when you first want to see what the mapped variable is
doing across the full study area before making any local or smoothed
interpretation.

Recommended order:

#. ``plot_spatial_overview.py``
#. ``plot_spatial_roi_overview.py``

This path helps answer questions such as:

- What does the full-domain point cloud look like?
- Does a local subregion behave differently from the rest of the map?
- Should I inspect the whole field first or immediately zoom to a known
  area of concern?

Surface-shape interpretation path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Choose this path when you want to understand the spatial field as a
continuous-looking surface and compare different ways of summarizing it.

Recommended order:

#. ``plot_spatial_contours_overview.py``
#. ``plot_spatial_heatmap_overview.py``

This path helps answer questions such as:

- Does the field show broad gradients or sharp local variation?
- Would contours or a heatmap communicate the structure more clearly?
- Is the apparent smoothness supported by the data density?

Decision-oriented spatial path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Choose this path when the main task is identifying priority zones or
understanding where local support really comes from.

Recommended order:

#. ``plot_hotspots_overview.py``
#. ``plot_spatial_voronoi_overview.py``

This path helps answer questions such as:

- Where are the strongest or most concerning values?
- Are those extremes widespread or confined to a few local cells?
- Does the apparent pattern reflect interpolation, or simply nearest
  sampled influence?

How to use this gallery well
----------------------------

A strong habit is to begin with the **least assumptive** map first.

In practice, that usually means:

#. start with ``plot_spatial_overview.py`` to see the raw point support,
#. then move to ``plot_spatial_roi_overview.py`` if a local zone matters,
#. use ``plot_spatial_contours_overview.py`` or
   ``plot_spatial_heatmap_overview.py`` only after checking whether a
   smoothed surface is visually justified,
#. and use ``plot_hotspots_overview.py`` or
   ``plot_spatial_voronoi_overview.py`` when the task is prioritization
   or support-aware interpretation.

That reading order helps prevent a common mistake in spatial work:
seeing a smooth, attractive surface first and forgetting how sparse,
irregular, or local the original support may have been.
