Evaluation
==========

This gallery focuses on **forecast-evaluation plotting** in GeoPrior.

The pages in this section are built as **guided lessons** for users who
already have model predictions, forecast tables, interval forecasts, or
ensemble outputs and now want to answer a practical question:

**How good is this forecast, where does it fail, and which evaluation
view should I trust for the next decision?**

That is the central purpose of this gallery.

Unlike the forecasting gallery, which focuses on visualizing forecast
paths, forecast tables, temporal trajectories, and spatial forecast
maps, the pages in this section are organized around a different job:

**turning forecasts into interpretable evidence about forecast quality**.

These lessons teach users how to read evaluation views such as:

- metric change across forecast horizon,
- direct forecast comparisons,
- radar summaries across segments or score families,
- time-weighted summaries that emphasize chosen horizons,
- prediction-stability views,
- naïve-benchmark skill via Theil's U,
- interval coverage,
- interval width and sharpness,
- weighted interval score,
- continuous ranked probability score,
- quantile calibration,
- compact QCE summaries,
- and final multi-metric score radars.

In other words, this gallery is about **judging forecast quality from
multiple angles**. It helps users decide whether a forecast is accurate,
stable, calibrated, sharp enough to be useful, and strong enough to
report, compare, or improve.

Why this gallery exists
-----------------------

A single evaluation number is rarely enough.

A model can look strong on one metric while still being weak in one of
several important ways:

- short horizons may be strong while long horizons degrade sharply,
- interval coverage may improve only because intervals became too wide,
- a forecast may be accurate on average but unstable across time,
- calibration may look acceptable globally while failing at specific
  quantiles,
- and one model may win on one score while losing on the decision rule
  that matters most for the task.

This gallery therefore turns evaluation into a sequence of lessons.
Each page shows how to:

#. prepare a small, realistic forecast example,
#. call one evaluation plotting helper,
#. explain what the plot is actually measuring,
#. show what healthy and unhealthy patterns look like,
#. and finish with a practical rule for using the same logic on real
   outputs.

The goal is not only to display scores. The goal is to teach users how
to **reason from the evaluation view**.

What this gallery teaches
-------------------------

Most lessons in this section follow the same broad structure:

#. introduce the evaluation question the plot helps answer,
#. build a stable toy example with point, interval, or quantile
   forecasts,
#. call the plotting helper in its simplest useful mode,
#. explain how to read the figure before making a decision,
#. add a second or third usage pattern,
#. finish with a checklist for adapting the helper to real forecast
   arrays or real forecast tables.

That structure matters. It means the examples are not only API demos.
They are meant to function as **evaluation training pages** for users
who want to inspect their own forecasts later.

What this gallery is not
------------------------

This section does **not** aim to:

- replace the forecasting gallery for raw forecast visualization,
- replace the diagnostics gallery for workflow validity or training
  behavior,
- present final publication figures as the main goal,
- or reduce forecast quality to a single ranking number.

Instead, it focuses on one practical job:

**teach the user which evaluation plot to use, what it means, and what
kind of forecast decision it supports.**

A useful rule of thumb is:

- ``forecasting/`` explains what the forecasts look like,
- ``evaluation/`` explains how good those forecasts are,
- ``diagnostics/`` explains whether the workflow and training process
  behind them look trustworthy,
- ``inspection/`` explains how to read the saved artifacts generated by
  those workflows.

Module guide
------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 36 22 42

   * - Module
     - Main output
     - Purpose
   * - ``plot_metric_over_horizon_overview.py``
     - Horizon-wise metric lesson
     - Learn how point or interval-oriented metrics change across
       forecast steps, how to compare grouped subsets, and how to spot
       long-horizon degradation before relying on one global score.
   * - ``plot_forecast_comparison_overview.py``
     - Forecast-comparison lesson
     - Compare forecast paths directly in temporal or spatial form so
       users can connect score summaries back to what the model is
       actually predicting.
   * - ``plot_metric_radar_overview.py``
     - Segment-radar lesson
     - Compare one chosen metric across segments, groups, or categories
       to see where performance concentrates or breaks down.
   * - ``plot_time_weighted_metric_overview.py``
     - Time-weighted metric lesson
     - Emphasize specific horizons through inverse-time or custom
       weights and learn when a weighted score tells a more useful story
       than an unweighted average.
   * - ``plot_prediction_stability_overview.py``
     - Stability lesson
     - Read prediction stability as a complementary quality signal and
       learn when forecast paths are too erratic even if average error
       looks acceptable.
   * - ``plot_theils_u_score_overview.py``
     - Relative-skill lesson
     - Benchmark forecasts against a naïve reference using Theil's U and
       decide whether the model is truly beating a simple persistence
       strategy.
   * - ``plot_coverage_overview.py``
     - Coverage lesson
     - Inspect whether interval forecasts cover observations often
       enough and learn why coverage alone is useful but insufficient.
   * - ``plot_mean_interval_width_overview.py``
     - Width lesson
     - Read interval width as a sharpness view and judge whether the
       forecast is informative or only safe because intervals are broad.
   * - ``plot_weighted_interval_score_overview.py``
     - WIS lesson
     - Combine interval width and miss penalties into one score and
       learn how to read the trade-off between sharpness and reliability.
   * - ``plot_crps_overview.py``
     - CRPS lesson
     - Evaluate full predictive distributions or ensembles with a score
       that rewards both concentration and correctness.
   * - ``plot_quantile_calibration_overview.py``
     - Quantile-calibration lesson
     - Compare nominal and empirical quantile behavior to determine
       whether quantile forecasts are calibrated across the distribution.
   * - ``plot_qce_donut_overview.py``
     - QCE-summary lesson
     - Read compact quantile calibration error as an at-a-glance summary
       of where calibration gaps remain across quantile levels.
   * - ``plot_radar_scores_overview.py``
     - Multi-score radar lesson
     - Build compact score profiles across categories or metrics and use
       them as a final synthesis view for comparison-oriented reporting.

Suggested reading paths
-----------------------

There is no single correct order, but four reading paths are especially
useful.

Point-forecast quality path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Choose this path when you first want to know whether the point forecast
itself is useful.

Recommended order:

#. ``plot_metric_over_horizon_overview.py``
#. ``plot_forecast_comparison_overview.py``
#. ``plot_time_weighted_metric_overview.py``
#. ``plot_theils_u_score_overview.py``

This path helps answer questions such as:

- Do later horizons become much harder?
- Does the forecast path look reasonable when plotted directly?
- Should near-term or long-term horizons matter more in my summary?
- Is the model really beating a simple baseline?

Uncertainty and interval-quality path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Choose this path when your forecast includes uncertainty bounds and you
want to judge whether those bounds are believable and useful.

Recommended order:

#. ``plot_coverage_overview.py``
#. ``plot_mean_interval_width_overview.py``
#. ``plot_weighted_interval_score_overview.py``
#. ``plot_crps_overview.py``

This path helps answer questions such as:

- Are the intervals covering observations often enough?
- Are they too wide to be decision-useful?
- Does a better score come from better calibration or just wider bands?
- Does the full predictive distribution still look strong when judged as
  a distribution, not only as a median path?

Calibration-reading path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Choose this path when your main concern is whether quantiles and
probabilities are aligned with observed frequencies.

Recommended order:

#. ``plot_quantile_calibration_overview.py``
#. ``plot_qce_donut_overview.py``

This path helps answer questions such as:

- Which quantiles are over- or under-covering?
- Is the calibration error concentrated in the tails or spread across
  all quantiles?
- Does the forecast need recalibration before reporting?

Comparison and synthesis path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Choose this path when you need a compact comparison across segments,
outputs, or score families.

Recommended order:

#. ``plot_metric_radar_overview.py``
#. ``plot_prediction_stability_overview.py``
#. ``plot_radar_scores_overview.py``

This path helps answer questions such as:

- Which segment or subgroup is hardest?
- Is one model smoother but less accurate?
- Which score profile best matches the decision rule that matters for my
  application?

How to use these lessons with real forecast outputs
---------------------------------------------------

Most evaluation pages begin with small synthetic or hand-built forecast
examples. That is useful for documentation because it keeps the lesson
stable and easy to read.

However, the real workflow value comes from replacing those demo arrays
or demo tables with your own outputs.

A practical pattern is:

#. export or collect the forecast outputs you want to evaluate,
#. identify whether you have point forecasts, interval forecasts,
   quantile tables, or ensembles,
#. open the matching lesson in this gallery,
#. replace the demo arrays or DataFrame with your real outputs,
#. check that column names and shapes follow the helper's expected
   contract,
#. and then read the plot using the same interpretation logic taught on
   the page.

This is one of the main goals of the evaluation gallery: the examples
should remain useful **after** the user already has real forecast
results.

How to read the plots in this section
-------------------------------------

Most plots in this gallery are intentionally practical. They are not
only decorative figures. They are **decision plots**.

That means they are meant to answer questions like:

- Where does error rise across the forecast horizon?
- Is the model better than a naïve baseline?
- Are intervals calibrated or merely wide?
- Does one output behave differently from the others?
- Which quantiles are failing calibration?
- Which metric profile best fits the reporting goal?

When reading these pages, users should usually ask:

**What forecast decision does this plot support?**

That question keeps evaluation practical and prevents the user from
reducing forecast quality to a single number too early.


Why multi-view evaluation matters
---------------------------------

In a forecasting workflow like GeoPrior, weak decisions often come from
looking at one score in isolation:

- low MAE may hide poor long-horizon behavior,
- acceptable coverage may hide intervals that are too wide,
- good calibration at one quantile may hide tail failures,
- a strong score average may hide one unstable output,
- and a smooth forecast may still underperform a naïve baseline.

Multi-view evaluation helps catch those cases earlier and more clearly.
That is why this gallery is intentionally positioned between:

- forecast generation,
- calibration and evaluation reading,
- and model comparison or reporting.

Notes
-----

- These pages are intentionally lesson-oriented and
  interpretation-first.
- Most examples use compact synthetic or template-like forecast arrays
  so the documentation remains stable and quick to build.
- The goal is not only to show what a plotting helper returns, but to
  teach how a user should read the result.
- A good practical sequence is:

  - start with horizon-wise error and direct forecast comparison,
  - then inspect interval quality and probabilistic scores,
  - then inspect quantile calibration,
  - and finally use radar-style summaries for compact comparison.
